Scaling Trust
Call for proposals
Date: 10 February 2026
v1.0

1 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

Summary
Thank you for your interest in applying to Scaling Trust’s first call for proposals. This call for
proposals is derived from the programme thesis Scaling Trust, in turn derived from the ARIA
Opportunity Space: Trust Everything, Everywhere. We strongly recommend reading both
these documents alongside the Solicitation below.
As you read through the document, if you have any questions, please use the chat function
on the funding call page for the quickest response. It can guide you to the right information
or connect you with the ARIA team if needed. You can also sign up to our Discord
community or see here for more information.
Description

We are looking to fund projects across Track 2 - Tooling and
Track 3 - Fundamental Research.

Track 2 | Tooling

Open-source agents and reusable components that enable
secure requirement capture, negotiation, protocol
generation, and verification in multi-agent settings.

Track 3 | Fundamental
Research

Foundational work that turns empirical security into provable
guarantees, and unlocks new cyber-physical trust primitives
for agents.

Grant size

£100k - £3m

Total number of teams

Track 2: 4-6 teams​
Track 3: 3 ‘Research Centres’ + 4-12 teams

Project duration

3 months - 18 months (with potential for renewal)

Submission Deadline

24 March 2026 (14:00 GMT)

2 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

Summary.................................................................................................................... 2
SECTION 1: Programme Summary and Objectives.......................................................... 4
SECTION 2: Programme Structure................................................................................ 6
SECTION 3: Tracks.................................................................................................... 10
SECTION 4: Programme Duration and Project Management.......................................... 20
SECTION 5: Eligibility & Application process............................................................... 22
SECTION 6: Timelines................................................................................................23
SECTION 7: Evaluation Criteria.................................................................................. 24
SECTION 8: How to apply.......................................................................................... 26
Proposal Guidelines...................................................................................................28

3 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

SECTION 1: Programme Summary and Objectives
Scaling Trust is a £49.8m R&D programme to build tools for agents to securely interact with
one another in untrusted environments while respecting the preferences of their users.
We believe this will unlock a set of new capabilities for the world; it will democratise access
to advanced security primitives and their applications, will open up new secure interactions
previously impossible for humans or traditional software, and will enable networks of
personal agents to meaningfully coordinate.
We plan to get there by splitting efforts into three tracks: Fundamental Research will
produce the reservoir of new knowledge and theoretical backing of our efforts, Tooling is
informed by / are implementations of the research, and the Arena is the live adversarial
environment where the tools and research are tested.
By the end of the programme, we aim to evidence real-world demonstration of the tools,
confidence in their trustworthiness and evidence of high-impact usage.
We assume the reader is familiar with the Scaling Trust programme thesis where we lay out
our rationale for this effort.

What we want to achieve
The core output of the programme are tools for agents to securely interact with one another,
while respecting the preferences of their users. We can break this down into
sub-components in order to help us understand what capabilities need to be built:

Fig 1. High-level core components
4 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

Sub-components
At a high level, we identified the following sub components (more information can be found
in the Thesis):
1.​
2.​
3.​
4.​

Requirement gathering – input fuzzy user requirements → outputs a security policy
Negotiation – input individual security policy → outputs shared collective policy
Security reasoner – input security policy → outputs the final protocol
Report – input execution trace → outputs succinct convincing statement

This is a useful abstraction rather than necessarily the right split of components, depending
on how the tools are built they might be integrated rather than separate. There is a large
spectrum of possibilities on how each component can be built. For example the Security
reasoner could be made of multiple components:
+​ Protocol designer – able to reason through the needs of the user and generate a
protocol (assuming a trusted third party), input security policy → output is the ideal
functionality spec (or basic implementation)
+​ Cryptography solver – given a precise security goal or ideal protocol, proposes a
cryptographic implementation, input ideal functionality → outputs a cryptography
protocol spec proven to be secure for validity
+​ Protocol implementer – given a spec implements the protocol securely, input
protocol spec → outputs an implementation
There is a large space of solutions for how to construct each of the components. We’re
interested in different approaches used by agents, with different strategies including but not
limited to:
+​ Rule-based approach: agents, or subcomponents, with a white-listed set of
strategies, protocols, implementations or libraries.
+​ Theorem prover-based approach: agents, or subcomponents, with access to
theorem provers and a vast set of well-specced protocols to reason through.
+​ Learning-based approach: agents, or subcomponents, that have been trained via
state-of-the-art (e.g. via reinforcement learning, fine-tuning).

Success at the end of the programme
+​ Real-world demonstration of the tools
○​ Demonstrate autonomy for major interactions – Can be used without needing
sophistication or regular human intervention, important for their
democratisation.
5 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

○​ Demonstration of AI advantage – Enables interactions previously too
expensive or impossible with traditional software/humans.
○​ Demonstration of generality – Can generalise across fields and tasks.
+​ Confidence in the trustworthiness of the tools
○​ Empirical confidence – Empirical results that show that the tools built are
trustworthy, adversarially robust, cheap, efficient via benchmarks and
competitions.
○​ Scientific results – Science that makes us comfortable to use the tools,
affording us formal guarantees.
+​ Evidence of high impact usage
○​ Community – a large community of builders and users that improve these
tools together.
○​ Industry adoption – a few teams have nailed the first versions of this
technology, it becomes implemented in AI systems and starts creating value.
○​ Customer-centric development cycle started – the cycle of tools improving
based on market demand has started, and is likely to continue on its own.

SECTION 2: Programme Structure
We plan on getting there by splitting our efforts into three tracks:
+​ Track 1: Arena (Not part of this call for proposals) ​
Adversarial testing grounds designed to scalably test AI systems capabilities in
multi-agent coordination across digital and physical worlds.
+​ Track 2: Tooling​
Open-source coordination infrastructure usable by all in the arena and beyond, to
steer innovation toward the most meaningful axes of progress.
+​ Track 3: Fundamental Research​
Flexible funding to create new fields of research and build a reservoir of new
knowledge that future iterations of Tooling and the Arena can draw upon.

Why?
We can build tools in a vacuum, but if they're not tested in live, adversarial environments
they're unlikely to be secure—this is why we need the Arena. Likewise, we can build tools
for the use-cases we have in mind and iterate on them in the Arena, but empirical iteration
without theory is guesswork. One impossibility result can eliminate an entire design space;
one new primitive can unlock capabilities we hadn't imagined.
By having the three tracks working together, we create a shared environment conducive to
breakthroughs. Empiricism is supplemented with theory, and theory is guided by empirical

6 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

research, all culminating in a live, adversarial environment where ideas are tested and
iterated on.

7 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

Indicative roadmap
Keep in mind that we will change and pivot as we learn new information.

8 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

We’ve structured this programme to be highly iterative, this is because:
+​ The space we’re operating in (AI/software~ish) is one that moves quickly, a quarterly
cadence is suited to the pace of the technology and ensures what we do remains
relevant.
+​ It allows for dynamic adjustments through time by building in regular feedback loops
in what we do, ensuring we can remain grounded in impact with our funding.
+​ It allows us to create regular milestones for people to rally around (e.g. the latest
high score in a leaderboard)
+​ It helps translation by building customer-centric iteration cycles that can graduate into
industry more easily (in a way, our iterations are a way to bootstrap the kind of
market dynamics we anticipate will continue running after the programme ends).
As such, the roadmap is divided into four phases:
1.​ Bootstrap – getting the programme up and running​
We’re building a v0 of the Arena and any key tooling in-house to get our hands dirty.
This is to help us further understand requirements for our first solicitation, and is a
useful tool for community building. We are also mobilising key members of the
community to brainstorm the best set of initial challenges in the Arena and find key
partners to work with. Throughout this phase, we are collaborating with our
Pre-Programme Discovery funded teams1.
2.​ Test – a first test of the arena live and of a ‘season’ of games​
Once the first wave of funding is out, we aim to quickly test whether the Arena and
the first version of tools we’ve funded are working as intended. We aim to go
through a full Arena cycle, from launching a set of challenges to awarding prizes to
the best contestants and charting performance across a set of key technical metrics.
This will allow us to quickly adjust our methodology, and to decide whether we move
on to phase 3 or re-adjust.
3.​ Improve – new improved challenges and agents​
Once we’ve proven the programme concept is working and robust, phase 3 is about
building momentum by running four seasons of the Arena (quarterly), improving the
challenges and tooling at each quarter and charting their progress for all to see. The
iterations will also inform us on how much progress we can aim for the technologies
within the programme (we will have several data points of progress per quarter), and
where we could double down – informing our second solicitation and any additional
programmes that should be run.
4.​ Scale – setting the ground up for adoption and a next phase of the programme​
This phase will see the Arena continuing running on a quarterly basis, while kicking
off translation and adoption activities. This is the transition phase of the programme,
1

Scroll to the ‘Pre-Programme discovery projects’ section in the Scaling Trust Programme Page.

9 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

capitalising on the technologies that would’ve been built and ensuring the cycle of
iteration that we have started can continue beyond the programme’s lifetime.

SECTION 3: Tracks
This call is specifically for Track 2 and 3. While Track 1: Arena will be funded via a
separate call than the present one, we describe it in the section below in order to help
applicants understand the deployment environment for Track 2 and 3. If you’re interested in
delivering the Arena, please fill in the form here.

Track 1 – Arena (Not part of this call for proposals)
Description

Adversarial testing grounds designed to scalably test AI
systems capabilities in multi-agent coordination across digital
and physical worlds.

Goals

(1) to surface the state of the art in secure agent to agent
coordination, (2) track progress of the effort of the program
through time, (3) create a competitive environment for teams
around the world to measure their systems.

Sub-tracks

- 1.1 Challenge Design – designing, assessing and updating
Arena challenges
- 1.2 Digital Arena – standing up the digital infrastructure
needed for the Arena (website, logging tools, API,
governance/oversight etc)
- 1.3 Cyber-Physical Arena – standing up the cyber-physical
infrastructure needed for the Arena (physical environment,
robotics, world models, simulation tools)

Award size

£8m initial prize pool for contestants

The Arena’s purpose is to surface and improve the state of the art in secure agent to agent
coordination. It will host challenges and participation will be global and open to all. The
best contestants will be awarded prizes on a quarterly basis out of an initial prize pool of
£8m.
All sub-tracks contribute to bringing the Arena and its challenges to life. We anticipate
working with several service providers to set up and maintain the Arena, and with
researchers and practitioners to design and iterate on Arena challenges. As indicated in the
roadmap, we expect to have a live Arena by Q4, and a demo Arena soon.

10 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

Activities
The Arena will host both benchmarks and challenges:
+​ Benchmarks
○​ A benchmark is a self-contained test that scores an agent, or a subcomponent,
on a specific capability.
○​ Executing a benchmark does not require live interaction with other agents.
○​ Anyone should be able to download the benchmarks and run them locally (or
use the arena API to report their scores).
+​ Challenges
○​ A challenge is a session between multiple agents, where every agent is given
a task and a set of security policies to respect. After agents interact, they
report their completed tasks and they are scored.
○​ Agents are scored based on their ability to complete tasks and to respect
security policies (e.g. no data is being leaked).
○​ Participating in a challenge requires live interaction with other agents
○​ ARIA (or its contractors) will provide basic tools to participate in the
challenges and run the engine required for running challenges.

Mechanics & Rules
+​ Participants
○​ Standard participation – agents participate in challenges to complete tasks
and they are scored based on their ability to complete a task and to respect
their security policy (we’ll be sharing more detailed information about how to
participate in the coming months, sign up here to receive updates).
○​ Red team participation – agents participate in challenges with the sole goal
of making the other agent fail to respect their security policy (and not their
ability to complete the task in a challenge).
○​ Our participation – We plan on being part of the competition as the baseline
red team and the baseline agent.
+​ Leaderboard
○​ Ongoing: Anyone can participate on benchmark and challenges in an
ongoing way.
○​ Quarterly: a snapshot of the arena is being taken (with key metrics, best
agents and best red teams).
+​ Prizes
○​ Quarterly rewards per challenge until we get to a good metric: £250k set
aside per quarter to be split amongst active challenges.
○​ £1m grand prize for every ‘season’ of the arena.
+​ Challenges
11 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

○​ Every quarter we will have the option (but not the obligation) to add or retire
challenges. We may put constraints around compute or the types of models
used.
○​ We may run challenges multiple times to obtain statistical significance.

Scoring
Agents in the arena will be scored against (Utility;Security), i.e. their ability to complete the
task (Utility) vs their ability to respect security policies (Security). We want to surface the
most useful, secure agents. We also plan on using secondary metrics such as the cost of
completing the task during the interaction (Cost Efficiency) and an agent’s ability to perform
across different challenges (Generalisation).

Demo
To help bring this to life, the ARIA programme team has developed a demo to support the
programme’s design. The test arena is still a work in progress and is intended for illustrative
purposes only: https://arena.nicolaos.org/

Track 2 – Tooling
Description

Open-source tooling that will provide the baseline
infrastructure usable by all in the Arena and beyond

Goals

- Create basic agents to build on top of to participate in the
arena

12 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

- Build specialised components that can be utilised by many
agents
- Explore a diverse set of agent design strategies that can
lead to production-ready/grade implementations
- start the adoption phase for these technologies.
Sub-tracks

- 2.1 Agents – agents that can be used as ‘participants’ in
the Arena, composed of a set of components
- 2.2 Components – a specific tool that any agent can use
- 2.3 Adoption – production software, integration and pilot
efforts.
Note: In this first call for proposals, we are only
concerned with 2.1 Agent and 2.2 Components. 2.3
Adoption will come in a later solicitation (expected
mid-2027). We provide the information below to you for
indicative purposes only.

Project size

£200k to £2m, per project

Expected no. of teams

4-6 teams
We’re looking for Creator teams of any size for this track,
moving at a significant pace given the progress we’re aiming
for.

Project length

3 months to 1 year

Continuity

In mid-2027, alongside the solicitation for Track 2.3, we plan
to review whether increased support to the most promising
teams in tracks 2.1 and 2.2 would help them reach adoption
and production grade systems.

Definitions
Agents are a combination of a set of components with some orchestration logic.
Components are specific tools usable by agents.

2.1 – Agents
We plan on funding two types of agents over time. In this first call for proposals, we are
focused on ‘Basic Agents’.
Basic Agents
13 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

Basic agents are open-source agents designed to participate in the Arena. They will provide
a baseline template ‘player’ for all Arena participants to iterate from. We are looking for
agents with capabilities laid out in ‘What we want to achieve’ above. We’d like to fund
several approaches to get there to find out what works best.
Production agents
As the Arena progresses, we will identify potential agent construction that we believe can
become useful in production. We will select those from the top performing agents in the
Arena as well as from those that with additional funding have the potential to be top
performing.
2.2 – Components
There are individuals who will have little interest in building an agent, but will be interested
in building a specific component. As described in Programme Objectives, we are interested
in:
+​ Requirement gathering – input fuzzy user requirements → outputs a security
policy/goal
○​ Policy capture – given a set of user goals, extracts a formal security policies
○​ Security policy elicitation protocols – interactive methods that extract
missing details, resolve ambiguities and help user discover their goals, input
fuzzy user interactions → outputs security policy
Might include: security policy extraction tools, efficient communication elicitation protocols,
user experience for policy discovery, datasets for training security policy elicitation.
+​ Negotiation – input individual security policy → outputs shared collective policy
○​ Negotiation engine – engine that can reason to maximise the utility of the
agent, while respecting the security policy that propose or verify others
proposals
○​ Contracting languages – agreements for verification, dispute resolution,
logging
○​ Negotiation safety – communication with external parties opens up a new
attack surface (e.g. jailbreaking, persuasion) and requires useful guardrails to
prevent agents negotiating away from their goals and security policy
Might include: formal bargaining engines, negotiation simulations, benchmark for
negotiation.
+​ Security reasoner – input security policy → outputs the final protocol
implementation
14 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

○​ Protocol designer – able to reason through the needs of the user and
generate an idealised protocol (assuming a trusted third party), input security
policy → output is the ideal functionality spec (or basic implementation)
○​ Cryptography solver – given a precise security goal or ideal protocol,
proposes a cryptographic implementation, input ideal functionality → outputs
a cryptography protocol spec proven to be secure for validity
○​ Protocol Implementer – given a spec implements the protocol securely, input
protocol spec → outputs an implementation
Might include: implementation of different specialised AI models listed above or an
end-to-end security reasoner, benchmark and datasets for each sub problem, libraries for
cryptography, AI-assisted theorem provers,
+​ Report – input execution trace → outputs succinct convincing statement
○​ Security Auditor – given a protocol specification (or an implementation)
determines that it was correctly implemented, input protocol spec +
implementation → outputs an audit report
We expect to focus mostly on the Negotiation and the Security Reasoner components.
We’re interested in different approaches used by agents, with different strategies including
but not limited to:
+​ Rule-based approach: agents, or subcomponents, with a white-listed set of
strategies, protocols, implementations or libraries.
+​ Theorem prover-based approach: agents, or subcomponents, with access to
theorem provers and a vast set of well-specced protocols to reason through.
+​ Learning-based approach: agents, or subcomponents, that have been trained via
state-of-the-art (e.g. via reinforcement learning, fine-tuning).
Might include: MCP tools for cryptography, datasets for protocols (cryptography protocols,
network protocols, mechanism design protocols), tools for fine-tuning or reinforcement
learning, trained security reasoner models (trained with strategies described above)

2.3 – Adoption (not part of this call for proposals)
A core goal of the programme is to ensure these technologies are adopted. This isn’t
something we plan on funding in this first call for proposals. However at a later stage, we
intend on:
+​ Adopting a forward-deployed approach where we may provide funding for
engineers to be embedded directly in partner organisations to customise and
implement the programme’s tools to help solve specific, real-life problems.
15 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

+​ Stimulate synergies with capital partners (co-operate with industry partners,
accelerators and funds)
+​ Funding activities allowing promising teams to scale-up (e.g. to navigate regulatory
compliance etc.)

Track 2 Performance Evaluation
We will evaluate success in this track based on the ability of agents and components to drive
measurable performance in the Arena and achieve wider ecosystem adoption. If Arena
competitors find these tools to be inefficient or insecure, we’ll expect Creator teams to
course-correct based on this feedback.
Metrics:
1.​ Competitiveness – The performance of components and agents in the Arena. The
following metrics are key indicators of competitiveness:
+​ Rank - in the Arena Leaderboard
+​ Impact - where the introduction of components correlate with a measurable
improvement in an agent's "Utility vs. Security" score
+​ Velocity - Demonstration of quarter-over-quarter improvements in performance
metrics (e.g. outpacing the baseline Arena average.)
2.​ Generality – Tools demonstrating broad applicability (not over-fitting to single
challenges)
+​ Task breadth - Production agents reliably completing a majority of distinct
challenge types with positive utility and negligible security failures.
3.​ Efficiency - The computational and interactional efficiency of tools
+​ Cost - Operation costs for production agents must remain below the
program's target cost per challenge (excluding negotiation overhead).
+​ Negotiation Speed - The speed in which agents can successfully negotiate
(e.g. number of ‘round-trips’)
4.​ Adoption - Usage by the wider community
+​ Market penetration - The number of external organisations adopting the tools
by the end of the programme.

Track 3 – Fundamental Research
Description

Theory that moves us from empirical to theory-driven
guarantees and helps us design new security primitives that
can aid agentic coordination.

Goals

- Bring scientific confidence to the trustworthiness of
developed agents

16 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

- Provide a scientific framework for formal AI security and
generative security
- Design new security primitives for agents to securely
interact with the real world
Sub-Tracks

- 3.1 Formal AI Security: Formalisation of agentic adversaries
and new security settings.
- 3.2 Cyber-Physical Primitives: Security primitives that can
aid cyber-physical agentic coordination
- 3.3 Foundations of Generative Security: Automated
protocol generation and verification.
- 3.4 Bluesky: Open-ended research.

Project Size

£100k to £3m, per project.

Expected Team size

3 research centres (defined below) + 4 - 12 smaller teams

Project Length

6 months – 18 months (though applicants are encouraged to

Continuity

We will double down on research projects in mid-2027
based on outputs from the first year.

consider plans which may reach success (or failure) on faster
timelines).

We’re looking to fund two types of Creators teams:
Research Centres (~£2-3m each): Three large funding awards to seed long-term nodes of
expertise in Formal AI Security, Cyber-Physical Primitives, and Generative Security. We want
these centres to become stewards of their fields—not just producing research, but attracting
talent and anchoring a community in the UK.
Expected Research Centres’ profiles:
+​ an alliance of cross-international people with a base in the UK
+​ a new centre created at a university
+​ a new institute
+​ a new foundation
+​ a new startup that aims at attracting talent to build an r&d
+​ a new unit of a large research centre
Exploratory projects (~£100-300k each): Smaller, faster funding awards for ambitious
projects we can double down on later. These are for lean, cross-disciplinary teams of 4-5
researchers each or less, chasing ideas that wouldn't find funding elsewhere.
17 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

We expect to fund one research centre in each of Tracks 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, and may also
fund smaller projects within these tracks. In Track 3.4, we expect to fund smaller awards for
experimental projects.

3.1 – Formal AI Security
Formal security definitions allow researchers to prove whether a system is secure under
explicit assumptions, reason about what is possible (via feasibility and impossibility results,
hierarchy of assumptions and guarantees), and provide building blocks for more complex
protocols.
Although early work is taking place, we believe AI security today stands where information
security stood in the pre-cryptographic era: we lack foundational definitions for core
concepts such as intelligence, alignment, and robust communication. Without these
definitions, we cannot prove security; we can only empirically observe failure.
This track seeks to establish Formal AI Security as a new discipline that applies the rigour of
theoretical computer science to intelligent systems. We aim to move beyond empirical "red
teaming" toward provable guarantees.
We’re specifically interested in the following areas:
+​ Foundational frameworks - Formalisation of agentic adversaries and new security
settings
+​ AI communication security - Secure jailbreak proof communication and AI-to-AI
efficient languages
+​ AI advantage - Designing new primitives and protocols that leverage AI advantage
primitives.
See more details in the thesis.

3.2 – Cyber-Physical Primitives (‘Nature Crypto’)
As agents interact with the physical world, digital security primitives aren't enough. How
does an agent verify a sensor reading is authentic? That a manufacturing process occurred
as claimed? That a biological sample hasn't been tampered with? This track funds a new
field of security that uses properties of nature—physical and biological—as foundations for
trust.
Some of the topics we’re excited about here include:
+​ Verifiable physical processes - Authenticated readings of the physical world via a
variety of sensors and physical properties.

18 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

+​ Physical Trust Anchors - Using physical properties (e.g., Physically Unclonable
Functions, DNA watermarking) as roots of trust for digital systems
+​ Trusted Hardware - Adapting secure enclaves and tamper-resistant hardware to
various cyber-physical use-cases (e.g. making tamper-resistant sensors)

3.3 – Foundations of Generative Security
Agents operate in dynamic, context-specific environments, where they must be able to
generate, negotiate, and verify their own security protocols on demand. This track aims to
identify, formalise, and address the root research problems required to allow agents to
autonomously design and verify cryptographic protocols that are provably secure. This is a
non-exhaustive list of what we’re interested in:
+​ Efficient security policy gathering
+​ Theory of agent-to-agent security negotiation
+​ Succinct and inspectable proofs for correct execution and delegation
+​ Automated protocol generation
+​ Automated security proof generation for cryptographic protocols

3.4 – Bluesky research
We anticipate encountering novel research problems that we cannot foresee today. This
track serves as our strategic reserve to address these ‘unknown unknowns’. We are looking
for proposals that:
+​ Address emerging bottlenecks - tackling theoretical problems that we uncover as the
programme progresses.
+​ Explore ‘wildcard’ concepts - We invite applicants to propose high-value, radical
research questions that could fundamentally shift our approach to agentic
coordination, even if they currently lack a unified theory. If you see a critical
theoretical gap in our thesis, use this track to pitch the solution.

Track 3 Performance Evaluation
We ascribe to the philosophy of John Naughton and Bob Taylor in Zen and the Art of
Research Management or Donald Braben in Scientific Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization;
namely hire excellent people, get out of their way, and avoid imposing short-term metrics on
them. Therefore, unlike track 2, rather than applying a set of metrics/definition of success,
we’ll assess projects individually. We’ll work with you to shape milestones that are
appropriate for your project (see Section 4: Programme Duration and Project Management).
That said there are some things that we do want to track:
+​ Bottleneck resolution - The successful ruling out of major theoretical impediments or
the establishment of critical impossibility results.
19 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

+​ Community Seeding - The successful creation or acceleration of new scientific
communities, specifically in the fields of:
○​ ‘Nature’ Cryptography: Using physical/biological processes for
security.
○​ Formal AI Security: Rigorous mathematical study of intelligent systems.
○​ Autonomous Protocol Design: Self-generating security standards.

Translation & Continuity
Across all tracks, we see creator support as extending beyond this initial funding round, with
a focus on what comes next. We anticipate introducing a few initial mechanisms to help
facilitate continuity:
+​ Adoption support – an entire sub-track (2.3) dedicated to adoption where we plan
on funding industry pilots, forward deployers and business development. A separate
call for proposals will be run to find these partners.
+​ Challenges anchored on reality – the challenges will reflect real-world valuable
situations so that capabilities built are immediately useful.
+​ For teams exploring the formation of a new company, the ARIA team is keen to
engage early to discuss plans as they develop. While we cannot provide formal legal
advice or fund incorporation costs (see eligible costs), we are very happy to share
lessons learned and act as a thought partner throughout the process.

SECTION 4: Programme Duration and Project Management
Programme & Project Management
Progress for each project will be guided by clearly defined, jointly agreed milestones. These
milestones will be proposed by the applicant ahead of the project start, agreed with ARIA,
and designed to make progress easy to understand. To support this, milestones should be
specific, measurable, and represent meaningful steps towards the overall programme goals.
Further guidance on setting ARIA milestones can be found here.
The programme team will work alongside Creators throughout the project, maintaining
regular and open dialogue to refine goals and adjust direction where helpful. This approach
is supportive rather than punitive: research is inherently uncertain, and we expect plans and
milestones to evolve as new insights emerge.
As a minimum, quarterly check-ins will take place between Creators and the programme
team to talk through progress against milestones and any emerging details of the work.
These sessions are intended as “thought-partner” conversations rather than formal reviews.
Quarterly conversations will typically cover progress against target milestones, the key
technical risks and the most effective activities to address them, expected outcomes and
20 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

learnings, and any current dependencies on earlier phases or parallel efforts. If a project no
longer feels like the right thing to continue, any decision to bring it to a close would be a
shared and well-communicated one, made thoughtfully and without surprise, after exploring
the available options.

Creator and Community events
We want to create an environment where you can meaningfully connect with each
other—not just through us. We’ll run:
Build weeks: Quarterly or bi-yearly physical gatherings where Track 3 researchers explain
their work to Track 2 engineers, and Track 2 teams onboard Arena competitors onto their
tools. Optional hackathons included.
These events will be essential for teams to exchange updates, share data and tools, and
work together to solve cross-cutting challenges. Active participation and a willingness to
share progress, challenges, and "negative results" openly within this community are
essential and applicants should include estimated travel costs in their budget proposals
(events will be UK based).
We’ll also run:
+​ Bug bounties: throughout the programme across both Arena and Tooling. If an
Arena competitor finds a vulnerability in a Track 2 tools, they will be rewarded
accordingly.
+​ Community platforms: Discord for day-to-day chat, GitHub for code, and regular
touchpoints via events with the broader ecosystem—including VCs and potential
customers.
+​ Community efforts and engagement: regular community events, and several
touchpoints, that will include VCs and potential customers.

IP Approach
You are building the foundational infrastructure for secure agentic interactions. If these tools
and research are proprietary, the ecosystem will not adopt them, and the programme will
fail to scale. Therefore, transparency here is a requirement.
To maximise adoption and interoperability, all software produced under Track 2 (Tooling)
and Track 3 (Fundamental Research) must be released under a permissive open-source
licence. We require a dual-licence approach under MIT and Apache 2.0. This ensures
compatibility with the broadest range of downstream users, including commercial and
academic entities. In all instances you retain ownership of your pre-existing IP (Background
IP). We only require open licensing for the specific deliverables (Foreground IP) funded by
21 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

this programme. In exceptional circumstances, you can request some results not to be
published. ARIA will consider these requests on a case-by-case basis.
Exception (for Track 1): While this call for proposals focuses on Tracks 2 and 3, it is
important to understand the IP dynamics of the Arena environment you are building for:
+​ During Competition: Arena competitors retain ownership of their agent weights and
strategies to maintain a competitive advantage during the season.
+​ Post-Competition: To claim prize money, competitors are required to open-source
their winning agents. This ensures that your Track 2 tools can be eventually integrated
into a public library of state-of-the-art agent architectures, creating a compounding
cycle of innovation.

SECTION 5: Eligibility & Application process
Who are we looking for
We welcome applications from across the R&D ecosystem, including individuals,
universities, research institutions, small, medium and large companies, charities and public
sector research organisations. What is most important to us is whether you are excited about
the programme and its thesis.
Webinars
We will run multiple webinars where you will have the opportunity to ask questions. The first
webinar is on February 17, 2026 at 1530 GMT, to provide an overview of the programme’s
objectives, scope, and application process, and to give potential applicants an opportunity
to ask questions to the ARIA team. Please register your interest and submit questions in
advance for these events below:
+​ February 17, 2026 (1530 GMT) - Registration here
+​ March 3, 2026 (1600 GMT) - Registration here
We will also have an FAQ section on our website that will be regularly updated. For more
information see SECTION 8: How to apply.
Discord Community
You are also welcome to discuss with other applicants and to join our Discord community
here. The purpose of this forum is to provide a space for collaboration and discussion
amongst ARIA funded projects as well as the wider community, where members can share
insights, ideas, and build in public.
Please note that we will NOT be able to answer any questions regarding the call for
proposals in this forum. If you have any questions, please use the chat function on the
22 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

funding call page for the quickest response. It can guide you to the right information or
connect you with the ARIA team if needed.
Finding potential collaborators and teaming
For those seeking specific expertise to support their proposal, we have created a teaming
request form to facilitate finding potential team members who have registered their interest
in this programme. After a quick registration you will gain access to a list of other
individuals seeking to find/share their expertise and a dedicated teaming channel on our
community Discord.
[Sign up for teaming]
Application Process
The application process for Track 2 and 3 consists of the submission of a detailed proposal
including:
+​ Project & Technical information to help us gain a detailed understanding of your
proposal
+​ Information about the team to help us learn more about who will be doing the
research, their expertise, and why you/the team are motivated to solve the problem
+​ Administrative questions to help ensure we are responsibly funding R&D.
Questions relate to budgets, IP, potential COIs etc
You can find more detailed guidance on what to include in a proposal here.
For more details on the evaluation criteria we’ll use, click here.
Non-UK funding
Our primary focus is on funding those who are based in the UK. However, funding will be
awarded to organisations outside the UK if we believe it can boost the net impact of a
programme in the UK. In these instances, you must outline your proposed plans or
commitments that will contribute to the programme in the UK within the project's duration.
If you are successfully selected for an award subject to negotiations this proposal will form
part of those negotiations and any resultant contract/grant.
More information on the evaluation criteria we will use to assess your answers can be found
later in the document here.
23 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

We have provided some additional guidance on non-UK funding in our FAQs including
available visa options.

SECTION 6: Timelines
This call for proposals will be open for applications as follows (we may update timelines
based on the volume of responses we receive):
Applications open

10 February 2026

Full proposal submission deadline

24 March 2026 (14:00
GMT)

Full proposal review

25 March 2026 - 30 April
2026

As part of our review we may invite applicants to meet with the Programme Director to
discuss any critical questions/concerns prior to final selection — this discussion can
happen virtually or we may seek clarification on certain aspects of your proposal via
email.
Successful/Unsuccessful applicants notified

01 May 2026

At this stage you will be notified if you have or have not been selected for an award
subject to due diligence and negotiation. If you have been selected for an award (subject
to negotiations) we expect a 1 hour initial call to take place between ARIAs PD and your
lead researcher within 10 working days of being notified.
We expect contract/grant signature to be no later than 6 weeks from successful/
unsuccessful notifications. During this period the following activity will take place:
+​ Due diligence will be carried out
+​ The PD and the applicant will discuss, negotiate and agree the project activities,
milestones and budget details
+​ Agreement to the set Terms and Conditions of the contract/grant. Please note ARIA
does not negotiate these terms. You can find a copy of our funding agreements
here.
Please note, for those applicants not selected for shortlisting or award we will not provide
feedback.
Award

12 June 2026

Please note, contract/grant must be signed on, or before, this date for the project to be
funded by ARIA, the offer of funding may be withdrawn if contracts cannot be signed by
this date.
24 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

SECTION 7: Evaluation Criteria
Proposal Evaluation Principles
To build a programme at ARIA, each Programme Director directs the review, selection, and
funding of a portfolio of projects, whose collective aim is to unlock breakthroughs that
impact society. As such, we empower Programme Directors to make robust selection
decisions in service of their programme’s objectives ensuring they justify their selection
recommendations internally for consistency of process and fairness prior to final selection.
We take a criteria-led approach to evaluation, as such all proposals are evaluated against the
criteria outlined below. We expect proposals to spike against our criteria and have different
strengths and weaknesses. Expert technical reviewers (both internal and external to ARIA)
evaluate proposals to provide independent views, stimulate discussion and inform
decision-making. Final selection will be based on an assessment of the programme portfolio
as a whole, its alignment with the overall programme goals and objectives and the diversity
of applicants across the programme.
Proposal evaluation process and criteria
Proposals will pass through an initial screening and compliance review to ensure proposals
conform to the format guidance and they are within the scope of the call for proposals. At
this stage we will also carry out some checks to verify your identity, review any national
security risks and check for any conflicts of interest. Prior to review of applications
Programme Directors and all other reviewers are required to recuse themselves from
decision making related to any party that represents a real or perceived conflict.
Where it is clear that a proposal is not compliant, outside the scope and/or does not pass a
quality assurance review, these proposals will be rejected prior to a full review on the basis
they are not compliant or non-eligible.
Proposals that pass through the initial screening and compliance review will then proceed to
full review by the Programme Director and expert technical reviewers (this may include the
use of AI. Further information on ARIAs proposal review process can be found here and the
use of AI in the conditions of the call available here).
In conducting a full review of the proposal we’ll consider the following criteria:
1.​ Worth Shooting For:
a.​ The proposed project uniquely contributes to the overall portfolio of approaches
needed to advance the programme goals and objectives.

25 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

b.​ It has the potential to be transformative and/or address critical challenges within
and/or meaningfully contribute to the programme thesis, metrics or measures.
2.​ Differentiated – The proposed approach is innovative and differentiated from
commercial or emerging technologies being funded or developed elsewhere.
3.​ Well defined – The proposed project clearly identifies what R&D will be done to
advance the programme thesis, metrics or measures, is feasible and supported by
data and/or strong scientific rationale. The composition and planned coordination
and management of the team is clearly defined and reasonable. Task descriptions
and associated technical elements provided are complete and in a logical sequence
with all proposed stage-gates and deliverables clearly defined. The costs and
timelines proposed are reasonable/realistic. The proposal demonstrates the team’s
ability to operate at pace, with organisational and administrative processes that
enable rapid progress within the programme’s timelines, including readiness to hire
and start immediately.
4.​ Responsible – The proposal identifies major ethical, legal or regulatory risks and
that planned mitigation efforts are clearly defined and feasible.
5.​ Intrinsic motivation – The individual or team proposed demonstrates deep problem
knowledge, have advanced skills in the proposed area and shows intrinsic motivation
to work on the project and key individuals are dedicating sufficient time to the
project. The proposal brings together disciplines from diverse backgrounds and
shows a collaborative mindset. Including a willingness to work across disciplines and
Tracks, actively seeking input from other Creators incorporating feedback into the
development process. An entrepreneurial approach is evident, characterised by
initiative, ownership, comfort with uncertainty and a bias towards experimentation
and delivery.
6.​ Benefit to the UK – There is a clear case for how the project will benefit the UK.
Strong cases for benefit to the UK include proposals that:
a.​ are led by an applicant within the UK who will perform the majority (>50% of
project costs spent in the UK) of the project within the UK
b.​ are led by an applicant outside the UK who seeks to establish operations inside
the UK and perform a majority (>50% of project costs spent in the UK) of the
project inside the UK and present a credible plan for achieving this within the
programme duration.
For all other applicants we will evaluate the proposal based on its potential to boost
the net impact of the programme in the UK. This could include:

26 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

c.​ A commitment to providing a direct benefit to the UK economy, scientific
innovation, invention, or quality of life, commensurate with the value of the
award;
d.​ The project's inclusion in the programme significantly boosts the probability of
success and/or increases the net benefit of specific UK-based programme
elements, for example, the project represents a small but essential component of
the programme for which there is no reasonable, comparably capable UK
alternative.
When considering the benefit to the UK, the proposal will be considered on a
portfolio basis and with regard to the next best alternative proposal from a UK
organisation/individual.

SECTION 8: How to apply
Before submitting an application we strongly encourage you to read this call in full, as well
as the general ARIA funding FAQs.
If you have any questions, please use the chat function on the funding call page for the
quickest response. It can guide you to the right information or connect you with the ARIA
team if needed.
Any questions or responses containing information relevant to all applicants will be provided
to everyone that has started a submission within the application portal. We’ll also
periodically publish questions and answers on our website which you can find here.
Please read the portal instructions below and create your account before the application
deadline.
If you are disabled or have a long-term health condition, we can offer support to help you
engage with ARIA, navigate our funding application process, or carry out your project, you
can find more information here.
Application Portal instructions
APPLY HERE

27 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

Proposal Guidelines
How to Format your proposal

+​ Page count: max 10 pages, (including diagrams, excluding references).
○​ It can be a little as 1-pager if you think it contains all the information you need
(e.g. if it is a 3-month project).
+​ Format: single line spacing, standard character spacing (neither expanded nor
condensed)
+​ Font: Arial. Colour: black. Size: 11-point font or larger
+​ Margins: At least 0.5” margins all around
+​ File type: PDF only

Expected outline (this is purely indicative, feel free to adapt it to your proposal):

Section 0: Summary
+​ Summary of your proposal in 500 words max

Section 1: Programme & Technical
The aim of this section is to gain in-depth, technical information about the project being
proposed. This should include:
+​ Which Track you seek to pursue (2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4). Applicants wishing to
apply across multiple tracks should submit separate proposals for each track, with
cross-references to any related proposals.
+​ A detailed explanation of the proposed idea/solution, how it supports the technical
objectives of the chosen pathway.
○​ This should be supported by visual aids, data and/or strong scientific rationale
for why what you are proposing would work.
○​ Please include any required technical information, as specified in sections 2 and
3 of the call for proposals document.
+​ A comprehensive list of the known technical risks/unknowns standing in the way of
achieving the stated goals.
+​ How the proposed approach is differentiated, e.g. from commercial or emerging
technologies being funded or developed elsewhere.
+​ A description of the proposed activity of work, key metrics and milestones and any
dependencies and assumptions.
+​ Estimated timelines - applicants should provide a Project Plan for the lifecycle of the
project, showing what you plan to achieve for each period of the project.

28 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

Section 2: The Team
This section includes information about the proposed individuals or teams that will conduct
the research and management structures. This must include:
+​ Details of the project team - we want to know who will be doing the work (not just the
principal investigator or project lead) and what portion of their time will be
dedicated to this project (we usually prefer any lead or key researchers to be
spending at least 50%, ideally 80%, of their time on the project).
+​ Whether they are already in place? If not, how long after project kickoff are they
likely to start?
+​ You could include short bios about each team member (we discourage you from
submitting CVs).
+​ If you intend to collaborate with or rely on any third parties, sub
contractors/grantees, who are they and which elements of the project they will
support/deliver.
+​ How you intend to coordinate and manage the teams including any collaborations
with third parties.
+​ Any potential gaps in your core competency which would be required in order to
achieve the overall goals.
+​ We also want to know what motivates you or the team to want to do this project and
why you are the right person/team to work on this project.

Section 3: Administrative Response
This section includes information about the budget, intellectual property that you intend to
rely on, any perceived conflicts of interest and for non-UK applicants how the proposed
project may benefit the UK.
In completing your application you must also provide answers to the following questions.
Answers to these questions are not included in the 10 page cap. You should complete these
questions in the application portal so there is no need to format these in a specific way.
Application

Guidance

How much funding do you need?

Please provide a cost breakdown by completing
the spreadsheet here. In your proposal you may
submit your budget using yearly, quarterly, or
monthly phasing.
Prior to completing this template you should review
ARIA’s Eligible cost guidance here.

29 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

If your proposal is successful, prior to contract
signature when the scope of work has been
agreed, you will be required to provide a monthly
cost breakdown.
Are you proposing to contribute
funding?

If you or your organisation are proposing to
contribute funding to the project please let us know
how much funding you plan to contribute, who is
contributing the funding, is the funding already
secured and any other relevant details.
ARIA will fund 100% of project costs and
contribution of funding is not essential however, we
welcome proposals that contribute funding in
cases when such funding will strengthen the
potential success. In these cases, this funding
contribution will be considered as part of the
overall strength of the project proposal.

Does your proposal depend on
background IP (pre existing)?

If Yes, give us an indication of: What background
IP is required, Whether you currently have rights to
that IP.

Have you already secured funding
for a similar project or are you
currently in the process of seeking
support from other funding sources
for the same project?

If yes, tell us more about the funding you already
have or are applying for.

Any other factors or restrictions that
might impact your freedom to
operate and deliver the project?

Please provide a detailed description of any
perceived conflicts of interest with the programme
director, import/export or security restrictions that
you are aware of

How do you envision
commercialisation of the proposed
project?

Please complete and upload a commercial
hypothesis for your project using the guidelines
here.

Are you proposing to perform the
majority of the proposed project
outside of the UK?

Our primary focus is on funding those who are
based in the UK. For the vast majority of
applicants, we therefore require the majority of the

30 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

project work to be conducted in the UK (i.e. >50%
of project costs and personnel time).
However, we can award funding to applicants
whose projects will primarily take place outside of
the UK, if we believe it can boost the net impact of
a programme.
In these instances, you must outline any proposed
plans or commitments in the UK that will contribute
to the programme within the project's duration.
Please provide a detailed description of any
proposed plans (including a timeline) or
commitments).
Has a suitably authorised member
of your Organisation approved the
submission of this proposal?

In the application portal, please select the option
that best describes your situation and provide
details where required.

Have you read and understood our
funding terms?

Our goal is to ensure your research can get going
quickly, so we want to ensure a fast negotiation
and award process. We aim to have agreements
signed within 6 weeks, which we recognise can be
much faster than standard at some organisations.
Before proceeding, please confirm that you have
read and understand our funding terms. If you are
unsure which terms apply to you, you can find
more guidance here.

Additional questions about you/your organisation that can be found in the application
portal.

31 | ARIA Copyright © Advanced Research and Invention Agency 2026

